---
title: "A wireframe for happy stories and smooth sailing"
date: 2023-07-10T05:14:34.533Z
author: ValeriaVG
tags: [psychology,motivation,relationships]
summary: |
  I am a firm believer that I am responsible for my own happiness. Nonetheless there are certain people and routines that make it a lot easier to achieve.
---

Happiness for me is a warm feeling of joy and relaxation that comes with an
unshakable belief that I belong in this exact moment in time and space. That
brief alignment of every aspect, a minute when everything makes sense, a fragile
balance at the top of the pendulum swing.

I think the sense of belonging, of being understood and accepted is the need
that drove me through most of my life. Because the opposite was and still is
terrifying: being an outcast deprived of support and forgiveness is ought to be
a description of my personal hell.

But why? Why is it so important to be a part of a community, no matter how small
or big it is? I think because it provides certainty; a starting point for every
adventure, an anchor for any weather; a home to return to when the rest of the
world is on fire.

## Handling the change

Change is inevitable and as much as I welcome it - change breeds anxiety. That
feeling that eats me from inside out every time I find myself stunned by the
development I couldn’t predict. And a lot of them I can’t, but I try anyway.
Every time faced with unprecedented circumstances my mind goes into overload and
generates overwhelming amount of possibilities. I call them “what-ifs”. These
thoughts are essential for problem solving, provided that I can settle for a
finite number of possibilities, but a nightmare when I don’t have enough data to
make a weighted decision. In latter case all these possible futures keep
swinging in circles in my mind with increasing amplitude rendering me useless.

Think of being caught up in the open sea during a storm: the waves are crushing
from all the directions and it’s so dark that it’s impossible to see a way out.
But it’s much better with a guiding star or a lighthouse, isn’t it? It’s still
terrifying, but at least there’s one definitive way to a safe harbour.

And to be honest most of the overwhelming events come from social interactions:
people are way too unpredictable for me, I can’t read their non-verbal cues and
not all of them are literal when communicating verbally either. And so their
actions and reactions frustrate me more often than not; and to get back to the
bliss of understanding their motives I need to have safe environment to think
and a bit of time. A familiar face is better than a familiar place in that
sense: an anchor to hold on to. I need to understand and trust this anchor
person, I need to know that person on a deeper level and I need to be certain
that whatever happens the anchor will hold me.

## It takes a village

But, as acceptance goes, there’s always a limit, I am yet to discover a person
to unconditionally accept me or the one I could accept unconditionally. The best
I can do is a pact of reciprocal trust and acceptance. Since recently I call
this “one-conditional love”. But that’s rare, it requires a level of openness
and maturity that I don’t think I always have myself. And so I have many
different anchors: some are stronger than the others, some are more flexible,
some have longer chains and some at this point are lucid memories.

I once thought that it’s easier to rely only on myself and though it motivated
me to learn so many different skills, it also took too much effort and resulted
in mediocre outcomes. I don’t think we’re meant to do it alone: I think we’re a
mix of impressive talents and flaws for a reason: we ought to match and fit. Any
other person knows something that I don’t, lived through something I haven’t and
thus possesses something that I do not. And for me being surrounded by people
with whom we make sense together is one of the ways to achieve that elusive
feeling of happiness.

## Stories I'm telling myself

One of, but not the only one. Lives are unpredictable and despite of being quite
literally connected to each other 24/7 I still find myself in a comfortable
solitude every once in a while. And so when my living anchors have their own
lives I live mine. I like to have structure in it: not too rigid and not too
loose, a _lagom_ schedule and a plan. A default algorithm, that can be slightly
modified if needed, but provides good enough stand by mode. This is me in a box:
outside of the society, recharging my batteries for the next round, dreaming
away with the next big thing or simply indulging in whatever my mind or body
asks for.

I am used to always have a plan, a story I will stick to until something
changes. I started with very detailed stories of how my life should go: I wrote
scenarios for every single role in it and more often than not I was faced with
disappointment of failed expectations. And so with time my stories became a
little more like those choose-your-path books. I knew several endings, some
points of no return and paths I could take, but not every step. It worked
better, but far from perfect or even good enough.

My next iteration feels good so far: there are roles in my story, they have core
points and purpose. I do the casting and sometimes can offer prompts, but
ultimately it’s an improv. I’m learning to let go of control and keep my
creative side warmed up and ready to react, while making sure that show runs its
course. After all I still have goals or at least a general direction. Sometimes,
a scene plays itself perfectly and sometimes it only makes sense several years
later, but by the rule of good theatre everything on the stage serves its
purpose eventually.

And if nothing else remains, this belief is my lighthouse. I think it’s called
hope or maybe fatalism. Faith that no matter how many mistakes I make, I
wouldn’t screw up the right thing and if I did manage to, chances are it wasn’t
suppose to last any longer if at all.

And then being present and watching how the story unfolds becomes the filler
activity between the bursts of proactive decision making. A beautiful balance of
force and submission, observing and changing, patience and determination. A
skill I am yet to be any good at.
