---
title: "The Chosen One and other things I've learned about love"
date: 2023-06-02T18:53:10.935Z
author: ValeriaVG
tags: [love, relationships, identity]
summary: |
  Love is in the air! I do find that Pride month a better celebration of love than a Valentine's day.
  Both because love deserves much more than one day and because I'm convinced that love is about choices.
---

Love is very different from it's media portrayal. I think it's very individual
really: it will be unique and special for every single unit.

I used to believe in love at first sight: I longed to be swept of my feet the
moment our eyes met with a perfect stranger. I'm wise enough now not to deny
that it might be possible, but also to know that it's not the only option.

Options are important: me limiting myself to just one type of relationships
didn't go very well. I'm not your typical damsel in distress, you see, as per
public opinion I'm rather a dragon slaying knight. So sitting and waiting in my
tower was never my cup of tea.

I went on many romantic adventures, but to be honest it was more of a scientific
research as I put a lot of thought into it. It was a small, but a long lasting
research and I'm not even close to a final conclusion, so take it with a grain
of salt.

## Love as a feeling

My first theory was that love is sort of an emotional explosion. You go on with
your day and Boom - you're in love! But that would mean that I have no say in it
and yet somehow whenever I was "falling in love" there was a certain pattern.

In my teenage years I've been crushing on all the popular ones. They looked
differently, but being associated with them would have given me a status I
wanted, I guess. Of course back then I was sure that every time it was a genuine
feeling, though it rarely lasted long.

Whenever I did manage to get to know a person on a deeper level, or perhaps, get
a whisk of reciprocity, I was able to maintain that weird feeling for years. But
my feelings were rarely reciprocated back then, and, since I couldn't just sit
and wait like a proper princess, I did manage to experience a variety of
rejections.

And yet, to be fair, I wasn't in love then, not with the real people at least.
Looking back it was more of a wishful thinking - I wanted to experience love,
the other person didn't matter - it was all about me and, fair enough, how could
that have been reciprocated?

So, inevitably I got tired of waiting and took the matter in my own hands.

## Love as a choice

I've decided that instead of relying on a feeling I could just choose a partner
that would have higher chances of developing feelings for me. And so when my
close friend made a comment about my dress with a deep cleavage and very short
skirt, which I wore exclusively at home, I literally talked him into a
relationship. I knew I wasn't in love, but it didn't matter. That person cared
for me and I've promised myself that I'll do my best to fake it till a genuine
feeling emerges.

It worked for a while. Actually, not giving too much importance to a
relationship or one person made a lot of things easier. I guess, I could call
that arrangement "friends with benefits". We were really good at benefits and
that alone had us going on for years! But as friends we sucked more and more.

Turns out, it's really hard to be honest when you need to pretend most of the
time. In the end I gave up. They weren't happy, but inevitably came to the same
conclusion: we never really loved each other and once we started fighting we
slowly killed all the care we had.

And so feelings did matter.

## Love conquers all

Walking away from a marriage, that I didn't want, was a right choice, but it
also felt like I walked away from ever having a family of my own. And so I
desperately wanted what I had just lost.

After some trial and error I met my Prince Charming. He swoop me of my feet with
all the right words, I fell in love like I had never fallen before and my very
own heterosexual fairy tale unraveled right in front of me.

He said he loved me within days, he proposed within weeks. And we were so alike!
He was handsome, talented, smart and, finally, smitten by me, just as I was by
him.

We moved in together and I poured my whole self into this relationship. I've
swooped everything that wasn't fitting into the fairy tale under the rug. I
didn't tell him that I was intimate with one of my girlfriends as he already
found her obnoxious. I didn't tell him that she wasn't the only one I had
feelings for either.

I became a mother! I now had a family! How could I possibly be anything but
perfect, especially when my husband was already so very vocal about the flaws of
my social circle.

As it turned out, I do can give into love and let years pass by without noticing
the obvious. And when the obvious became blatantly obvious and I could no longer
trick myself back into a fairy tale. I was crushed, but I was also very
resilient.

I did tell my soon-to-be-ex-husband I was bisexual in the end: at this point he
didn't care anymore, but it felt good to let it out.

At first it was scary: me alone with two kids, realizing that I've spent a third
of my life being married to figment of my imagination. But I was also a bad ass
professional with an amazing job - I was safe on my own! It's incredible what
you can become when you don't have a choice for so long.

And now I had a choice!

## Love is a choice: One more time, with a feeling!

I had choices. It was amazing to see that the moment we ended things I've
noticed people being attracted to me once again. I guess they were always there,
but I never let myself notice anyone else while I was in a committed
relationship.

For a brief moment I got to experience crushes of incredible strength: my best
guess it that I had so much affection bottled within that it started spilling
out like a fountain the moment I got free.

Luckily for me I got to my senses pretty quick, without giving into the
impulses.

My marriage and specifically the way it ended taught me to trust my instincts
and to never ever again settle for something I don't want.

It took me a bit to figure out what I want though. As opposed to ten years ago,
now I didn't want _any_ relationship: I wanted a very specific one.

I wanted to be heard, understood and celebrated for being myself. I wanted trust
and safety. I wanted a person to call home.

My list was a bit longer than that and included couple of points about same
views on relationship and sex, ability to take care of themselves and,
ultimately, a requirement to have their own life that they'd proudly choose to
share with me. Emotional connection and ability to create and maintain one,
along with intelligence and resilience that I imagine one must have to do so,
were probably the strictest of my "demands".

For the first time in my life I was ready to wait for this relationship; I was
ready to be present in my own skin, to take interest in the person I'm with.

And that led me to the conclusion I'm at now:

There's no one size fits all and there's definitely more than one person that
would fit my description of a perfect partner. I didn't want to limit my options
to one ethnicity, gender, religion or certain appearance - I did learn that for
me none of it mattered. Time mattered, though, as it takes time to learn how to
communicate and get to know one another.

I believe that true love is so much more than just a feeling, though attraction
should, of course, come naturally. I believe it's more than a choice too: it's a
gazillion of choices one would make every day. A conscious choice to love that
one person, giving up on every other "one" there might be. A choice to be
yourself and lead your life with pride and joy as one should feel for their best
work.

Love, I think, happens when we look deep within ourselves, learn everything we
can about our needs, wants and purpose, take this knowledge and make the one we
deem worthy our Chosen One.

And surrendering this power to chance, blind faith or, worse, someone else,
feels like a waste of time.
