---
title: "Being authentic and not giving a damn of what others think"
date: 2023-05-28T19:14:18.889Z
author: ValeriaVG
tags: [identity, psychology, relationships]
summary: |
  On so many occasions I have been told to just be myself, yet it took me a while to figure out
  who I am and what it means to be me. 
  Adding other people to the equasion was and still is an even bigger challenge, 
  but I do believe I figured a thing or two about it along the way.
---

What is your favourite colour? Such an innocent question, isn't it? Yet it truly
puzzled me that I didn't have a definitive answer. Most of my clothes were
black, but I wasn't sure if that was because I liked it or because someone at
some point convinced me that it would make me look slimmer or wouldn't show
stains as easy as lighter colours. How do I know what I like? Can I just choose
some random colour and decide that from now on that would be my favourite?

My therapist said that it doesn't work this way. Apparently one is supposed to
just know what you want. Well, at that point I didn't want anything. I didn't
care much about myself then and most of my efforts have been spent on other
people. Other people were very important force in my life: they were deciding
how I should look and behave, what I'm allowed to wear, where I should spend my
money and nearly everything else.

I don't blame them, I wouldn't know who to blame, to be honest: after so many
years I wouldn't be able to trace where my limiting beliefs came from even if I
tried. Faceless generic "others" was a monstrosity with many faces and voices
and not a shred of compassion or empathy.

I've been this way up until the moment the same therapist comfirmed that I was
undoubtfully autistic. It might not sound like much, but for me it meant the
world: I was very very different from the _others_ and thus their beliefs could
no longer apply to me.

## Who am I, really?

Asking myself this question at the ripe age of 36 was a bit weird to say the
least, but at that point I've accepted that _weird_ is my new normal.

I started digging into my own psyche as if it would be a codebase I'm seeing for
the first time: I tried to find patterns and refrain from judgement.

I assumed there was a _core_; something that makes me my authentic self. It must
be something permanent or at least long lasting, something that would describe
me years ago, today and in the future.

Well, I was autistic, for starters; this influenced the way I perceive the world
around me, the way I behave and explains why my emotions have always been so
much stronger than _others_ expected of me.

So, the emotions then are influenced by my identity, right? If so, I could use
it to reverse-engineer my core values!

I started to really listen to my emotions: I've journaled every single day,
spent many hours with myself and talked obsessively about my feelings with
anyone who would listen to try and pinpoint why I felt the way I felt.

One of the things that I've realised was that I value deep emotional connections
more than anything else: having authentic relationships has always been my first
priority. But it only became obvious when I heard Bren√© Brown's talk about
vulnerability: I had a surge of emotions and a feeling of being truly seen and
understood.

As a result I've started to learn how to be more vulnerable and less afraid.
That meant speaking up, sharing my thoughts, ideas and creations without knowing
for sure how they would be received. Whenever I was in doubt I just needed to
ask myself if would I still do it even no one else would accept it?

It was scary the first couple of times. Of course, I started with the things
that wouldn't have significant effect: like sharing some ideas about
improvements at work. I knew that if they wouldn't be accepted - it wouldn't
cost me anything, except for maybe a bit of a hurt pride.

To my surprise it didn't hurt as much as I imagined. I guess being ready for a
challenge somehow made me more resilient to a failure. But most of my sugestions
have been met with praise and that gave me confidence to start taking bigger
risks.

## The art letting go and drawing lines

I liked being celebrated! I liked being taken seriously! And quickly realised I
wanted to feel this way most of the time. I've started celebrating myself: this
felt too important to outsource. I wrote myself letters, saying all the things I
wanted to hear from others, pointing out all my achievements and reminding
myself that every little mistake I make gives me an opportunity to grow and be
even better.

That worked quite well! I was finally starting to accept myself unconditionally
and gaining more and more confidence.

The more my self-esteem grew the less tolerant I was becoming to being treated
less than I deserved. I didn't yet know what I wanted, but I was certain about
what I didn't want.

I was surprised how easy it was to let go of my marriage: I knew I didn't want
any more lies and uncertanty and, since my every attempt to communicate my needs
and find a compromise failed, my conscience was clear.

I let go of people who couldn't respect my newly found needs. It was scary to
set boundaries at first, but my daughters helped me a lot with it - they were
among the first ones to accept and help me maintain them. Which was surprising,
as we used to fight a lot about the same mundane stuff them making a mess and
not cleaning up or making avoidable noise when I was trying to concentrate, to
name a few.

And yet, when I was able to calmly communicate what I needed, they started to
either respect it or negotiate an alternative to match their needs as well. We
still have screaming matches every once in a while, after all they are very
young and I'm still learning too, but we got so much closer to each other and
can now proactively care for one another!

Who would have thought that boundaries can do that?!

## Budgeting the f***s to give

I clearly care a lot about my children and that I wouldn't want to change ever,
yet a lot of other things I cared about used to get in a way of that. My first
three years in Sweden I spent working long hours to try and make the company I
worked for succeed. I told myself that I did it for my family: our finances were
scarce and I rationalised that more money would solve all of our problems.

But, truth be told, I was using my work to hide from said problems: working a
lot was tiring, but it was also easy because I knew exactly what to do at every
given moment. Not to mention the praise I was receiving for being such a hard
worker! Would I work as much if I knew that the startup worked for would fail?
No, I wouldn't. I desperately wanted to matter and I hoped that if I'd succeed
publicly that would mean that I'm worth something.

I did learn a lot from this experience and thus I don't feel like my time was
wasted, but I do see now how valuable my time is. There's a limited amount of
hours in any given day and I'm pretty sure that eventually I'll start getting
older. And so there's a strictly limited amount of f*cks I can give.

Just like I started to learn how to be financially responsible by chosing the
biggest value for the least amount of money, I started to consciously choose who
and what I spend my energy on.

I couldn't care anymore about the things outside of my control as no matter how
much resources I poured I would've made zero difference. Flushing down the drain
didn't sound like a smart investment after all!

I was still taking risks, sometimes I was losing miserably, sometimes I was
hitting a jackpot and mostly I found myself somewhere in between those two. But
decision making became easier: I could just imagine several outcomes, analyse my
emotions, match whatever I was trying to achieve with my core values and needs
and make a consious choice of how I wanted to proceed.

With every choice I made I gained a deeper insight on what I wanted and soon
enough I could visualise and more importantly verbalise my desires in details.
As well as the reasons behind those wants and needs.

It's a process and there's a lot of room for improvement still, yet my life
became much more joyous than it had ever been before.

My favourite colour is white, by the way. I chose it to be back then, but I
truly like it. White reminds me of blank canvas and freedom, makes me feel a
little like a rebel and means the brightest light for me.

Though my wardrobe went through much wilder changes and includes pretty much
every color of the spectrum.

After all, I am so much more than others would possibly think of me, why would I
settle for any less than everything that I want!
